README.md, before:



# Ubuntu Dotfiles / larsoyd

These are my personal patches and configuration overrides for the GNOME Shell environment, specifically targeting **Dash to Panel** and **Desktop Icons NG (DING)**.

## Patched Extensions

### 1. Dash to Panel

**Installation Path:**
`~/.local/share/gnome-shell/extensions/dash-to-panel@jderose9.github.com`

**Patch Applied:** `metro.patch`

**Description:** This patch modifies the "Metro" style running indicators. By default, the indicators are rectangles that can awkwardly bump into each other. This patch transforms them into slightly inset, rounded capsules and centers them under the icon. It utilizes the existing dot size and color settings, changing only the geometry for a more pleasing aesthetic.

---

### 2. Desktop Icons NG (DING)

**Installation Path:**
`/usr/local/share/gnome-shell/extensions/ding@rastersoft.com`

> **Important Note:**
> Ubuntu’s GNOME session mode explicitly refuses to load user copies of system extensions (even if found in `~/.local`). To ensure edits take effect, patched Ubuntu extensions must be placed in `/usr/local/share/...`. GNOME prefers `/usr/local/share` over `/usr/share` on a standard Ubuntu setup, allowing these patches to persist without being overwritten by `apt`.

--

**Patch Applied:** `ding_unselect.patch`

**Description:** Fixes a persistent issue where double-clicking a desktop launcher leaves the icon selected. This patch schedules `unselectAll()` on idle, ensuring it runs after the click/release logic finishes.

--

**Patch Applied:** `ding-fixed-step-grid.patch`

**Description:** Switches DING from "justified/stretchy" placement to a **fixed-step grid**.
*The Problem:* DING originally calculates row height using `Math.floor(height / maxRows)`. This forces the grid to fill the entire available height, distributing leftover pixels into the row steps. Because coordinates are calculated proportionally, rounding errors accumulate. On lower rows (5 or 6), this results in visual "drift" where the spacing feels inconsistent, especially with smaller fonts.
*The Fix:* This patch implements a fixed-step grid logic:
* Icons are placed using fixed math: `row * _elementHeight`.
* A "dead zone" is implicitly defined for remainder pixels at the bottom/right.
* Items snapped to the dead zone are clamped to the last valid row/column.
* This ensures icons adhere to the requested cell size (`Prefs` + spacing) rather than stretching to fill the monitor.
 
 

---

## Style Overrides (CSS)

### GNOME Shell CSS

**File:** `~/.config/gnome-shell/gnome-shell.css`

This file tweaks the visual balance of the Dash to Panel extension. Specifically, the clock typography and the behavior of the "Show Desktop" button so it acts more as a visual separator.

1. Clock: I find the default clock text too large and ugly. To use this correctly you need to install the Panel Date Format (by KEIII) extension so you can set a custom clock format. Then set the format to 2 lines (time & date) with 24-hour time with dconf: 

```bash
dconf write /org/gnome/shell/extensions/panel-date-format/format "'%H:%M%n%d/%m/%Y'"
```

This makes the clock appear on top of the date underneath it similar to Windows. Finally, the patch forces font size down to 0.85em in order to prevent issues and ensures the text lines are centered instead of aligned from the left. 

2. Show Desktop: I use the "Show Desktop" button at the end of my panel to clear the screen. By default, the border stretches from the very top to the very bottom, looking like a fugly wall. I added top and bottom margins to "cut" the line. This pushes the element away from the panel edges, transforming it into a floating separator which looks much cleaner.

```css
/* Dash to Panel clock: center the lines + slightly smaller */
.dashtopanelMainPanel .panel-button.clock-display .clock {
    text-align: center !important;
    font-size: 0.85em !important;
}

/* Target the Show Desktop button acting as a separator */
.showdesktop-button {
    /* "Cut" the line by pushing the element away from the panel edges */
    margin-top: 5px !important;
    margin-bottom: 5px !important;
}

```

### GTK 3.0 CSS

**File:** `~/.config/gtk-3.0/gtk.css`

These tweaks adjust the font size and shadows on the desktop launchers (DING). For me 9.5 is the sweet spot for names on the launchers, but it is heavily dependent on the monitor and icon size. My icons are set on Tiny. Tweak accordingly.

```css
/* Decrease font size for Desktop Icons NG */
window.desktopwindow .file-label,
window.desktopwindow .file-label:backdrop,
window.desktopwindow .file-label-dark,
window.desktopwindow .file-label-dark:backdrop {
    font-size: 9.5pt;
    /* x-offset y-offset blur-radius color */
    text-shadow: 1px 2px 3px black;
}

```

---

Commit message:

Clarify font size adjustment in README
Updated README to clarify font size adjustment for better appearance and prevent clipping.

README.md, after:



# Ubuntu Dotfiles / larsoyd

These are my personal patches and configuration overrides for the GNOME Shell environment, specifically targeting **Dash to Panel** and **Desktop Icons NG (DING)**.

## Patched Extensions

### 1. Dash to Panel

**Installation Path:**
`~/.local/share/gnome-shell/extensions/dash-to-panel@jderose9.github.com`

**Patch Applied:** `metro.patch`

**Description:** This patch modifies the "Metro" style running indicators. By default, the indicators are rectangles that can awkwardly bump into each other. This patch transforms them into slightly inset, rounded capsules and centers them under the icon. It utilizes the existing dot size and color settings, changing only the geometry for a more pleasing aesthetic.

---

### 2. Desktop Icons NG (DING)

**Installation Path:**
`/usr/local/share/gnome-shell/extensions/ding@rastersoft.com`

> **Important Note:**
> Ubuntu’s GNOME session mode explicitly refuses to load user copies of system extensions (even if found in `~/.local`). To ensure edits take effect, patched Ubuntu extensions must be placed in `/usr/local/share/...`. GNOME prefers `/usr/local/share` over `/usr/share` on a standard Ubuntu setup, allowing these patches to persist without being overwritten by `apt`.

--

**Patch Applied:** `ding_unselect.patch`

**Description:** Fixes a persistent issue where double-clicking a desktop launcher leaves the icon selected. This patch schedules `unselectAll()` on idle, ensuring it runs after the click/release logic finishes.

--

**Patch Applied:** `ding-fixed-step-grid.patch`

**Description:** Switches DING from "justified/stretchy" placement to a **fixed-step grid**.
*The Problem:* DING originally calculates row height using `Math.floor(height / maxRows)`. This forces the grid to fill the entire available height, distributing leftover pixels into the row steps. Because coordinates are calculated proportionally, rounding errors accumulate. On lower rows (5 or 6), this results in visual "drift" where the spacing feels inconsistent, especially with smaller fonts.
*The Fix:* This patch implements a fixed-step grid logic:
* Icons are placed using fixed math: `row * _elementHeight`.
* A "dead zone" is implicitly defined for remainder pixels at the bottom/right.
* Items snapped to the dead zone are clamped to the last valid row/column.
* This ensures icons adhere to the requested cell size (`Prefs` + spacing) rather than stretching to fill the monitor.
 
 

---

## Style Overrides (CSS)

### GNOME Shell CSS

**File:** `~/.config/gnome-shell/gnome-shell.css`

This file tweaks the visual balance of the Dash to Panel extension. Specifically, the clock typography and the behavior of the "Show Desktop" button so it acts more as a visual separator.

1. Clock: I find the default clock text too large and ugly. To use this correctly you need to install the Panel Date Format (by KEIII) extension so you can set a custom clock format. Then set the format to 2 lines (time & date) with 24-hour time with dconf: 

```bash
dconf write /org/gnome/shell/extensions/panel-date-format/format "'%H:%M%n%d/%m/%Y'"
```

This makes the clock appear on top of the date underneath it similar to Windows. Finally, the patch forces font size down to 0.85em which you can tweak, for me it looks better on my panel and isn't clipping. It also ensures the text lines are centered instead of aligned from the left. 

2. Show Desktop: I use the "Show Desktop" button at the end of my panel to clear the screen. By default, the border stretches from the very top to the very bottom, looking like a fugly wall. I added top and bottom margins to "cut" the line. This pushes the element away from the panel edges, transforming it into a floating separator which looks much cleaner.

```css
/* Dash to Panel clock: center the lines + slightly smaller */
.dashtopanelMainPanel .panel-button.clock-display .clock {
    text-align: center !important;
    font-size: 0.85em !important;
}

/* Target the Show Desktop button acting as a separator */
.showdesktop-button {
    /* "Cut" the line by pushing the element away from the panel edges */
    margin-top: 5px !important;
    margin-bottom: 5px !important;
}

```

### GTK 3.0 CSS

**File:** `~/.config/gtk-3.0/gtk.css`

These tweaks adjust the font size and shadows on the desktop launchers (DING). For me 9.5 is the sweet spot for names on the launchers, but it is heavily dependent on the monitor and icon size. My icons are set on Tiny. Tweak accordingly.

```css
/* Decrease font size for Desktop Icons NG */
window.desktopwindow .file-label,
window.desktopwindow .file-label:backdrop,
window.desktopwindow .file-label-dark,
window.desktopwindow .file-label-dark:backdrop {
    font-size: 9.5pt;
    /* x-offset y-offset blur-radius color */
    text-shadow: 1px 2px 3px black;
}

```

---
